Print this form, fill it out, sign it, and mail to CNRI at the
following address:

    Python Developers
    Corporation for National Research Initiatives
    1895 Preston White Drive, Suite 101
    Reston, VA 20191
    USA

For small contributions you may send a note with your contribution via
email instead (see bugrelease.txt).


PYTHON LICENSE AGREEMENT

CONTRIBUTION DESCRIPTION:

    ________________________________________

    ________________________________________

    ________________________________________

    ________________________________________

    (use back if more space is required)


CNRI acknowledges, with thanks, the receipt by CNRI from Licensee of
the above-described Contribution ("Contribution") to the Python
software and its related documentation.

Licensee confirms to CNRI that, to the best of Licensee's knowledge
and belief, the Contribution is free of any claims of parties other
than Licensee under copyright, patent or other rights or interests
("claims").  To the extent that Licensee has any such claims, Licensee
hereby grants to CNRI a nonexclusive, irrevocable, royalty-free,
worldwide license to reproduce, distribute, perform and/or display
publicly, prepare derivative versions, and otherwise use the
Contribution as part of the Python software and its related
documentation, or any derivative versions thereof, at no cost to CNRI
or its licensed users and without any accounting obligation to
Licensee of any kind, and to authorize others to do so.

Licensee hereby acknowledges that CNRI may, at its sole discretion,
decide whether or not to incorporate the Contribution in the Python
software and its related documentation.  Licensee further grants CNRI
permission to use Licensee's name and other identifying information
provided to CNRI by Licensee for use in connection with the Python
software and its related documentation.

EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED HEREIN, LICENSEE MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS
OR WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, WITH RESPECT TO THE ABOVE-DESCRIBED
CONTRIBUTION.  BY WAY OF EXAMPLE, BUT NOT LIMITATION, LICENSEE MAKES
NO AND DISCLAIMS ANY REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR
FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  IN NO EVENT SHALL LICENSEE BE
LIABLE TO USERS OF THE CONTRIBUTION FOR ANY INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL OR
CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR LOSS WHATSOEVER AS A RESULT OF USING,
MODIFYING OR DISTRIBUTING THE CONTRIBUTION, OR ANY DERIVATIVE THEREOF,
EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY THEREOF.

READ AND AGREED,

LICENSEE'S SIGNATURE:

Date:

Name (print):
   
E-mail address:
