\chapter{Building C and \Cpp{} Extensions on Windows
     \label{building-on-windows}}


This chapter briefly explains how to create a Windows extension module
for Python using Microsoft Visual \Cpp{}, and follows with more
detailed background information on how it works.  The explanatory
material is useful for both the Windows programmer learning to build
Python extensions and the \UNIX{} programmer interested in producing
software which can be successfully built on both \UNIX{} and Windows.


\section{A Cookbook Approach \label{win-cookbook}}

\sectionauthor{Neil Schemenauer}{neil_schemenauer@transcanada.com}

This section provides a recipe for building a Python extension on
Windows.

Grab the binary installer from \url{http://www.python.org/} and
install Python.  The binary installer has all of the required header
files except for \file{pyconfig.h}.

Get the source distribution and extract it into a convenient location.
Copy the \file{pyconfig.h} from the \file{PC/} directory into the
\file{include/} directory created by the installer.

Create a \file{Setup} file for your extension module, as described in
chapter \ref{building-on-unix}.

Get David Ascher's \file{compile.py} script from
\url{http://starship.python.net/crew/da/compile/}.  Run the script to
create Microsoft Visual \Cpp{} project files.

Open the DSW file in Visual \Cpp{} and select \strong{Build}.

If your module creates a new type, you may have trouble with this line:

\begin{verbatim}
    PyObject_HEAD_INIT(&PyType_Type)
\end{verbatim}

Change it to:

\begin{verbatim}
    PyObject_HEAD_INIT(NULL)
\end{verbatim}

and add the following to the module initialization function:

\begin{verbatim}
    MyObject_Type.ob_type = &PyType_Type;
\end{verbatim}

Refer to section 3 of the
\citetitle[http://www.python.org/doc/FAQ.html]{Python FAQ} for details
on why you must do this.


\section{Differences Between \UNIX{} and Windows
     \label{dynamic-linking}}
\sectionauthor{Chris Phoenix}{cphoenix@best.com}


\UNIX{} and Windows use completely different paradigms for run-time
loading of code.  Before you try to build a module that can be
dynamically loaded, be aware of how your system works.

In \UNIX{}, a shared object (\file{.so}) file contains code to be used by the
program, and also the names of functions and data that it expects to
find in the program.  When the file is joined to the program, all
references to those functions and data in the file's code are changed
to point to the actual locations in the program where the functions
and data are placed in memory.  This is basically a link operation.

In Windows, a dynamic-link library (\file{.dll}) file has no dangling
references.  Instead, an access to functions or data goes through a
lookup table.  So the DLL code does not have to be fixed up at runtime
to refer to the program's memory; instead, the code already uses the
DLL's lookup table, and the lookup table is modified at runtime to
point to the functions and data.

In \UNIX{}, there is only one type of library file (\file{.a}) which
contains code from several object files (\file{.o}).  During the link
step to create a shared object file (\file{.so}), the linker may find
that it doesn't know where an identifier is defined.  The linker will
look for it in the object files in the libraries; if it finds it, it
will include all the code from that object file.

In Windows, there are two types of library, a static library and an
import library (both called \file{.lib}).  A static library is like a
\UNIX{} \file{.a} file; it contains code to be included as necessary.
An import library is basically used only to reassure the linker that a
certain identifier is legal, and will be present in the program when
the DLL is loaded.  So the linker uses the information from the
import library to build the lookup table for using identifiers that
are not included in the DLL.  When an application or a DLL is linked,
an import library may be generated, which will need to be used for all
future DLLs that depend on the symbols in the application or DLL.

Suppose you are building two dynamic-load modules, B and C, which should
share another block of code A.  On \UNIX{}, you would \emph{not} pass
\file{A.a} to the linker for \file{B.so} and \file{C.so}; that would
cause it to be included twice, so that B and C would each have their
own copy.  In Windows, building \file{A.dll} will also build
\file{A.lib}.  You \emph{do} pass \file{A.lib} to the linker for B and
C.  \file{A.lib} does not contain code; it just contains information
which will be used at runtime to access A's code.  

In Windows, using an import library is sort of like using \samp{import
spam}; it gives you access to spam's names, but does not create a
separate copy.  On \UNIX{}, linking with a library is more like
\samp{from spam import *}; it does create a separate copy.


\section{Using DLLs in Practice \label{win-dlls}}
\sectionauthor{Chris Phoenix}{cphoenix@best.com}

Windows Python is built in Microsoft Visual \Cpp{}; using other
compilers may or may not work (though Borland seems to).  The rest of
this section is MSV\Cpp{} specific.

When creating DLLs in Windows, you must pass \file{python15.lib} to
the linker.  To build two DLLs, spam and ni (which uses C functions
found in spam), you could use these commands:

\begin{verbatim}
cl /LD /I/python/include spam.c ../libs/python15.lib
cl /LD /I/python/include ni.c spam.lib ../libs/python15.lib
\end{verbatim}

The first command created three files: \file{spam.obj},
\file{spam.dll} and \file{spam.lib}.  \file{Spam.dll} does not contain
any Python functions (such as \cfunction{PyArg_ParseTuple()}), but it
does know how to find the Python code thanks to \file{python15.lib}.

The second command created \file{ni.dll} (and \file{.obj} and
\file{.lib}), which knows how to find the necessary functions from
spam, and also from the Python executable.

Not every identifier is exported to the lookup table.  If you want any
other modules (including Python) to be able to see your identifiers,
you have to say \samp{_declspec(dllexport)}, as in \samp{void
_declspec(dllexport) initspam(void)} or \samp{PyObject
_declspec(dllexport) *NiGetSpamData(void)}.

Developer Studio will throw in a lot of import libraries that you do
not really need, adding about 100K to your executable.  To get rid of
them, use the Project Settings dialog, Link tab, to specify
\emph{ignore default libraries}.  Add the correct
\file{msvcrt\var{xx}.lib} to the list of libraries.
